# MLRadarClustering
Research Project Investigating the Applications of Machine Learning Algorithms in Radar Detection Clustering

Abstract
World War II ended in 1945, but the times we are living in are far from peaceful. The Russian invasion of Ukraine that started in February 2022 has already resulted in 8000 civilian casualties and the number is growing. Radar technology has been used since World War II in the military for detecting threats and providing warning in advance. Radar systems transmit electromagnetic waveforms to detect the movement and position of objects. The objects reflect the radio waves which are processed by the radar system to maximize detection of real targets and minimize detection of spurious noise events. An example of a radar application is detecting approaching enemy ships at sea as targets in the presence of background noise such as turbulent ocean waves. A critical step in radar processing is clustering, where multiple received detections are grouped into targets characterized by a center of mass, or centroid, that are tracked over time to establish range (distance), bearing (angle), velocity and heading. Traditional radar clustering algorithms use a fixed range and bearing threshold to group detections. However, there are weaknesses to this method that impede the accuracy of clustering, which makes it important to work on improving these algorithms. Clustering algorithms are a key part of machine learning (ML) to recognize patterns in data and make predictions, but their application in radar systems has been rather limited so far. Thus, the focus of this project was to investigate the accuracy of machine learning algorithms in radar system clustering, specifically K-means clustering and DBSCAN. Time series data was simulated based on target characteristics (range, bearing, velocity) and thresholded to produce detections that were used as inputs to the machine learning based clustering algorithms. The results confirmed that machine learning clustering algorithms can accurately identify individual radar clusters as shown especially by the DBSCAN algorithm, which created clusters that matched the actual targets with nearly perfect accuracy. Given that war and conflict are serious concerns even today and jeopardize the lives of innocent civilians, this project aimed to study and help improve the next generation of radar technology for enhanced target tracking.
